[Term Entry] C# Strings: .Format() (#5609)
Codecademy/docs: content/c-sharp/concepts/strings/terms/format/format.md

---
Title: '.Format()'
Description: 'Creates a new string by replacing placeholders in a format string with the string representation of specified values.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Formatting'
  - 'Methods'
  - 'Strings'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-c-sharp'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

The **`.Format()`** method creates a new string by replacing placeholders in a format string with the string representation of specified values. Non-string values are converted to strings by calling their `.ToString()` method.

> The string representation of each value can also be based on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The string representation of each value is also based on:
```

The same parameter specifier can be used multiple times in the format string if the same value needs to appear more than once.

## Example 1

The following example uses two values (a string and a date) to create a new string by applying the `.Format()` method to a format string. The string value (`name`) is inserted into the `{0}` placeholder. The date value (`loginDate`) is used in two placeholders with the same parameter specifier (`{1:d}` and `{1:t}`) to display the date and time parts separately. Here, `d` and `t` specify standard short date and short time formats, respectively. Since no culture argument is provided, the date and the time are formatted according to the rules of the current culture (`en-US`, in this case).

```cs
using System;

public class Example {
  public static void Main (string[] args)
  {
    string name = "John";
    DateTime loginDate = new DateTime(2024, 9, 2, 17, 45, 0);

    // Using String.Format to create the message based on the current culture:
    string message = String.Format("Hi {0}, your last login was on {1:d} at {1:t}.", name, loginDate);

    Console.WriteLine(message);
  }
}
```

> The previous example outputs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example results in the following output::
```

```shell
Hi John, your last login was on 9/2/24 at 5:45 PM.
```

## Example 2

The following example is a variation of the previous one which shows how to format `loginDate` using the rules of the British culture (`en-GB`).

```cs
using System;
using System.Globalization;

public class Example {

  public static void Main (string[] args)
  {
    string name = "John";
    DateTime loginDate = new DateTime(2024, 9, 2, 17, 45, 0);

    // Using String.Format to create the message based on the British culture:
    CultureInfo culture = CultureInfo.CreateSpecificCulture("en-GB");
    string message = String.Format(culture, "Hi {0}, your last login was on {1:d} at {1:t}.", name, loginDate);

    Console.WriteLine(message);
 }
}
```

> The previous example outputs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example results in the following output::
```

> **Note:** To understand why `1 | 2 = 3`, convert the operands in binary format (`1` becomes `01` and `2` becomes `10`), then apply the `|` operator bit by bit using the following rules `0 | 0 = 0`, `0 | 1 = 1`, `1 | 0 = 0`, and `1 | 1 = 1`. The result of the operation `10 | 01` is `11` which corresponds to `3`.

The `F` specifier works like `G`, but it attempts to display an integer as a list of matching names even if the enum type is not defined with the `Flags`attribute. For example, in our case `((Access)3)` is displayed as `Read, Write` even if the `Access` type is defined without the `[Flags]` attribute.

The `D` displays the enum value as the corresponding integer, and `X` as the corresponding hexadecimal value. For example, `Access.Write` is displayed as `2` with `D`, and as `00000002` with `X`.

> 

Reviewer: Please remove this section. The content is good, but for a term entry, it is too big.

---
Title: '.Format()'
Description: 'Creates a new string by replacing placeholders in a format string with the string representation of specified values.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Formatting'
  - 'Methods'
  - 'Strings'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-c-sharp'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

The **`.Format()`** method creates a new string by replacing placeholders in a format string with the string representation of specified values. Non-string values are converted to strings by calling their `.ToString()` method.

> The string representation of each value can also be based on:
> 
> - any additional format information embedded in the corresponding placeholder;
> - a specific culture.

Reviewer 2: This part can be a bit difficult to understand, as the reader might not understand what the additional format information means.

Also, avoid using `;` as it can often confuse readers.

To make it easier to relate, we can add examples like this - 

```suggestion
The string representation of each value can also be based on:

- any additional format information specified in each placeholder (such as number or date formats).
- a specific culture or regional style, which influences how values like dates and numbers are formatted
```

## Syntax

```pseudo
String.Format(formatString, value_1, value_2, ..., value_n);

String.Format(culture, formatString, value_1, value_2, ..., value_n);
```

The `.Format()` method is a static method of the `String` class that defines the following parameters:

- `formatString`: a **composite format string** that contains plain text and **format items**, which are placeholders to be replaced by the specified values.
- `value_1`, `value_2`, ..., `value_n`: the values that replace the format items in `formatString`. They can be objects of any type. Each format item requires a corresponding value argument.

> - `culture`: an object implementing the `IFormatProvider` interface (usually a `CultureInfo` object), which specifies how to format numeric and date values according to a specific culture. If not passed, the conventions of the current culture are used (i.e., `CultureInfo.CurrentCulture`).

Reviewer 2: This statement should be simplified for beginners, we don't need to mention new terms to explain what the parameter does here. It can be written as follows - 

```suggestion
- `culture`: This specifies how numbers and dates should be formatted based on the rules of a specific culture (like language or region). If not provided, it will use the default settings of your system.

```

```

Where:

- a **parameter specifier** (mandatory) is a number starting from `0` which indicates the position of the replacing value among those passed to the method. For example, `{0}` for the first value, `{1}` for the second, etc..
- an **alignment specifier** (optional) is a number, separated by a comma, that indicates the minimum number of characters for the value's string representation, which is padded with spaces only if too short. The padding occurs on the right if the specifier is negative (left alignment), or on the left if positive (right alignment). For example, `{0, 15}` right-aligns the first passed value taking up at least 15 characters.
- a **format specifier** (optional) is a string, separated by a colon, that applies a specific format to the value. It is only allowed for types implementing the `IFormattable` interface, essentially numeric, date, and enum values. If missing, it defaults to `G`.

To display a literal curly brace in the result string, you need to double it (`{{`).

The same parameter specifier can be used multiple times in the composite format string if the same value needs to appear more than once.

### Format Specifiers

> Format specifiers vary by value type and indicate either:
> 
> - a **standard format**, when consisting of a single character corresponding to a predefined format,
> - or a **custom format**, when consisting of multiple **custom format specifiers**, each of which is a character with a specific formatting meaning.
> 

Reviewer 2: Only the new terms should be emphasized when they are introduced, standard format and custom format are not new terms.

Also, the sentences in the list should begin with a capital letter, and we should add some examples for clarity and to make it easy to understand.

```suggestion
Format specifiers vary by value type and indicate either:

- A standard format that consists of a single character corresponding to a predefined format (e.g., "C" for currency, "D" for decimal).
- A custom format that consists of multiple characters that define specific formatting rules for the value (e.g., "yyyy-MM-dd" for dates).

```

> Formatting data related to a format specifier (such as which character to use as the decimal separator or the date separator) are usually taken from the `NumberFormat` and `DateTimeFormat` properties of the `CultureInfo` object currently used by the formatting procedure. Changes to these data allow for format customization.

Reviewer 2: I think this can be skipped at this point as the reader is still learning how to format basic strings and this seems to introduce more unknow terms and object references.

```suggestion
```

| `E`       | Scientific notation with uppercase exponent prefix.                                             | `1.234500E+004` |
| `F`       | Integral and decimal digits with optional negative sign.                                        | `12345.000`     |
| `g`       | The more compact between fixed-point and scientific notation with a lowercase exponent prefix.  | `12345`         |
| `G`       | The more compact between fixed-point and scientific notation with an uppercase exponent prefix. | `12345`         |
| `N`       | Numeric format. It is essentially like `F` but with the integral part digits split into groups. | `12,345.000`    |

A standard numeric format can be followed by a **precision specifier**, a number that has a different meaning based on the format specifier:

- For `C`, `E`, `F`, and `N`, it is the desired number of decimal places.
- For `D`, it is the minimum number of digits desired. Shorter values are padded with leading zeros.
- For `G`, it is the maximum number of significant digits that can appear.

If missing, a default precision based on the format specifier is applied.

> A custom numeric format can be defined using **custom numeric format specifiers**. The following table lists some of them and shows examples of formatting the value `1234.5` using the US culture. Note how some formats round the result.

Reviewer 2: Only the newly introduced terms should be emphasized.

```suggestion
A custom numeric format can be defined using custom numeric format specifiers. The following table lists some of them and shows examples of formatting the value `1234.5` using the US culture. Note how some formats round the result.
```

| `,`       | A comma between two digit placeholders in the integral part indicates to split the integral digits into groups. The actual group separator is based on the culture. | `#,#.#` >> `1,234.5`    |
| `;`       | A semicolon separates the different sections of the format for positive, zero, and negative values ​​(in that order). The zero section can be skipped.              | `-(-#);#` >> `-(-1235)` |
| `\`       | Escape character to display characters otherwise interpreted as specifiers. It must be doubled in quoted string literals.                                           | `\##` >> `#1235`        |
| any other | Displayed as is.                                                                                                                                                    | `≈#` >> `≈1235`         |

### Date Formats

The following table shows some of the commonly used standard formats for date values and how they would format a date and time value corresponding to June 7, 2009, at 8:05:09 PM, with the US culture.

> | Specifier | Description                  | Example                           |
> | --------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
> | `d`       | Short date.                  | `6/7/09`                          |
> | `D`       | Long date.                   | `Sunday, June 7, 2009`            |
> | `f`       | Full date and short time.    | `Sunday, June 7, 2009 8:05 PM`    |
> | `F`       | Full date and long time.     | `Sunday, June 7, 2009 8:05:09 PM` |
> | `g`       | General date and short time. | `6/7/09 8:05 PM`                  |
> | `G`       | General date and long time.  | `6/7/09 8:05:09 PM`               |
> | `M`       | Month and day.               | `June 7`                          |
> | `t`       | Short time.                  | `8:05 PM`                         |
> | `T`       | Long time.                   | `8:05:09 PM`                      |
> | `Y`       | Month and year.              | `June 2009`                       |

Reviewer 2: The description here is not a full sentence, so we can skip using a full stop here.

```suggestion
| Specifier | Description                  | Example                           |
| --------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| `d`       | Short date                  | `6/7/09`                          |
| `D`       | Long date                   | `Sunday, June 7, 2009`            |
| `f`       | Full date and short time    | `Sunday, June 7, 2009 8:05 PM`    |
| `F`       | Full date and long time     | `Sunday, June 7, 2009 8:05:09 PM` |
| `g`       | General date and short time | `6/7/09 8:05 PM`                  |
| `G`       | General date and long time  | `6/7/09 8:05:09 PM`               |
| `M`       | Month and day               | `June 7`                          |
| `t`       | Short time                  | `8:05 PM`                         |
| `T`       | Long time                   | `8:05:09 PM`                      |
| `Y`       | Month and year              | `June 2009`                       |
```

> A custom date format can be defined using **custom date format specifiers**. The following table lists some of them and shows examples of formatting the value corresponding to June 7, 2009, at 8:05:09 PM using the US culture.

Reviewer 2: Only the newly introduced terms should be emphasized.

```suggestion
A custom date format can be defined using custom date format specifiers. The following table lists some of them and shows examples of formatting the value corresponding to June 7, 2009, at 8:05:09 PM using the US culture.
```

## Example

The following example shows how to compose a message using the `.Format()` method and how the result is affected by the culture involved in the formatting procedure. The message is generated twice: once with the current culture (in this case, `en-US`) and once with the British culture (`en-GB`). The example also shows how to use the same parameter specifier in different format items to format the same value (`loginDate`), once as a date and once as a time.

```cs
using System;
using System.Globalization;

public class Example {

  public static void Main (string[] args)
 {
    string name = "John";
    DateTime loginDate = new DateTime(2024, 9, 2, 17, 45, 0);
    string formatString = "Hi {0}, your last login was on {1:d} at {1:t}.";

 // Displaying a message using the current culture:

    string message = String.Format(formatString, name, loginDate);
    Console.WriteLine(message);          

 // Displaying the same message but using an Italian culture:

    CultureInfo culture = CultureInfo.CreateSpecificCulture("en-GB");
    message = String.Format(culture, formatString, name, loginDate);

    Console.WriteLine(message);
 }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This example section should be near the syntax section so that it's easy for the reader to study the syntax and then see how it works in the example, and then see what more customizations can be done using different format specifiers.

Also, this example should be broken down into two different examples - the first example simply shows how `.Format()` works, and then as the next step, we can show how different cultures can be specified as well.

     this.lastName = lastName;
     this.type = type;
     this.rank = rank;
     this.lastLogin = lastLogin;
   }

   public string FirstName { get { return firstName; } }
   public string LastName { get { return lastName; } }
   public string FullName { get { return String.Format("{0}, {1}", lastName, firstName); } }
   public UserType Type { get { return type; } }
   public float Rank { get { return rank; } }
   public DateTime LastLogin { get { return lastLogin; } }
}

public class Example {

 static User[] UserList = new User[]
 {
   new User("Alice", "Apple", UserType.Student, 3.456f, new DateTime(2024, 9, 5, 14, 5, 34)),
   new User("Robert", "Blue", UserType.Teacher, 2.453f, new DateTime(2024, 10, 15, 10, 20, 48)),
   new User("John", "Green", UserType.Student, 4.63f, new DateTime(2024, 10, 31, 9, 5, 6)),
   new User("Amelia", "Orange", UserType.Parent, 1.4f, new DateTime(2024, 11, 3, 17, 10, 24))
 };

 static void Main()
 {
    foreach(User user in UserList)
    {
      string line = String.Format("{0} ({1}). Rank: {2:0.00}. Last login on {3:MMM d, yyyy h:mm:ss tt}.",
      user.FullName, user.Type, user.Rank, user.LastLogin);
      Console.WriteLine(line);
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: This codebyte example can be a bit difficult for beginners as it involves a lot of new concepts such as classes and loops. We need to simplify this to something very basic where the reader has to only focus on the `.Format()` method and its results. 

Please consider something simple like this - 

```cs
using System;

class Program
{
    static void Main()
    {
        string firstName = "John";
        string lastName = "Doe";
        int age = 30;
        double height = 5.9;

        // Using String.Format to create a formatted string
        string formattedString = String.Format("Name: {0} {1}, Age: {2}, Height: {3} feet", firstName, lastName, age, height);

        Console.WriteLine(formattedString);
    }
}
```
